2024-04-01

Hi Oscar,

sending over the first round of feedback. Again, I'm sorry it took
longer than expected.

Overall, I really like the paper. The structure is simple but effective,
and it gets to the point very quickly. The overall idea of the moldable
development is easily understandable, I think, and the grouping of
patterns is clear and justified. The support of decision making is a
valuable goal and the benefit of understanding the systems and doing it
in a cost-effective way is also important and apparent.

However, it was not until I got to section 2 when I grasped the idea of
the moldable development sufficiently. As far as I know, it is not yet a
wide-spread term and as such, I think it would be beneficial to expand
on the description given in the Abstract, as this is usually where
readers get hooked. As said, I fully "got it" only in section 2, which
might suggest the Introduction could explain a bit more as well. But I
think that might be more my subjective thing, and at worst an issue with
reordering a few things and reorganizing (sub-)sections. Feel free to
leave this one for the larger sample size of readers in the workshop.

The example with the GT and Ludo implementation is good, but since not
all people (like me) will know what Ludo is, it makes it hard to
visualize "in action". Have you thought about making the IDE setup and
the code used public, e.g. via Docker image on GitHub? I think a live
demo like that might be useful as this can be hard to imagine to a full
extent.

What I think would be beneficial is a subsection/paragraph to identify
the target audience and what the expected benefit for them is. A
sentence can sum this up already in the Abstract. Even if you don't see
this as a benefit to the paper itself, I would appreciate if you could
sum it up for me in the next email, so I know who's shoes to put myself
into upon future readings, so to speak.

I'll delve into the patterns themselves in the next iteration as this is
meant to be more general feedback, but there are a few notes I want to
raise. Firstly, just a visual thing, but I would format the patterns
more clearly. I know you are using the named paragraphs for individual
sections of the pattern template used (Context, Problem, Forces,
Solution, Consequences), and that makes sense in the proper use of the
TeX template. But when I first skimmed through the paper, I actually
thought the patterns start way later then they actually do, because the
"headings" are really not distinctly visible. A table format would be
challenging with the amount of text there is in some parts, so I would
at least put the "headings" in bold or on their own lines.

Since I'm on the formatting stuff, the format is precisely as described
at the EuroPLoP website. But that's actually more for the proceedings,
a.k.a. the final submitted version in September. For the conference
itself, it is way better to make it easier on the workshop participants
to read, mark, highlight and make notes when printed out. So I would
make it one column, increase the font size and the space between the
lines, perhaps even include line numbers for easy referencing.

The other thing that relates to the patterns generally is the number of
them. It is great to have the whole language in a single paper, but fair
warning, the workshop group will most probably not have enough time to
discuss them all in depth. Thus, you could start thinking about which of
the patterns you want them to focus on (I'd say four, at maximum). If
you would really want a full feedback on all of them, there are a couple
ways. You could wait and see whether your workshop group would have an
unused slot at the conference (due to fewer papers or absent authors)
and ask if they'd be willing to use that for another feedback for you.
You could call for a "birds of the feather" session at another point of
the conference to run through the ones not covered in the workshop. Of
course, that's all dependent on the other people's capabilities, time
and willingness. The last option I'm only including for completeness.
You could let the workshop validate a subset this time and another
subset on another PLoP conference and only publish the paper once all
the patterns have gone through the process. But with the amount of work
you clearly put into the paper already and the numerous independent
reviews you managed to get outside of the conference, I definitely see
why this wouldn't fit you. Which is way I'm only mentioning it, not
suggesting it.

That's about all from me for now. Next time, I will aim at the patterns
specifically (let me know if you have any priorities among them). But
since this is really a well-written and constructed work, I don't expect
my notes being numerous, nor severe in nature.

Let me know when you upload a new version, or in case you will not
incorporate any of the feedback above (which is totally fine), let me
know to continue with the current one.

With regards,

Petr PÃ­cha
